Hello everyone, welcome back. This is
the fourth lecture in the beginner
section of statistical rethinking 2026.
I have an ambitious number of slides
today. Um but I will control my pace. We
will get through what we can. Uh let me
start by saying what the goals are and
we'll see how far we can get. Um
so as I said in the first lecture the
the course is called statistical
rethinking and it's a basian course. So
the superficial reading is that the
rethinking is about being basian. That's
not true. Uh the basian part's free. The
rethinking part is a scientifically
justifiable workflow for connecting your
scientific models to statistical
procedures and the summaries we produce
from them. as this workflow thing that
comes up and I hope is haunting your
dreams at this point, right? This slide
will be burned into your retinas uh by
the end of this course. That's the goal,
right? Um and we will be elaborating on
it, but the the core is is uh the middle
part of this and some elaborations that
I'd like to emphasize in this and the
next two or three lectures as we go
through. Um, we want to focus on a
number of skills that are involved in
what you might call the subflows of this
kind of diagram because each part of it
involves a certain number of tasks and
solving those tasks help you solve later
ones as you move from the left to the
right in the diagram. And as I said
before, of course, you can go backwards
in this because you can change your
mind. Yeah, this is choose your own
adventure.
um uh you're not stuck uh uh to
relentlessly move to the right. Uh one
of the things we need to get better at
is to understand how to derive
statistical models from our est demands.
It is very glib of me just to put on the
diagram generative model plus est
demands equal statistical model. There's
a lot of stuff that goes in there and it
will be nice to take some of the art out
of that and put some science into it.
And we're going to start being much more
methodological and transparent about
that beginning in this lecture and
especially in the next one. That is
giving you algorithms for taking uh
clear scientific estimates and
generative models and producing
estimators and ways to validate those
estimators. Um there are a bunch of
practical uh engineering tasks, software
engineering tasks that arise once you've
decided on the structure of an
estimator. And in this lecture and in
subsequent ones we're going to focus on
what I think is sort of the most
important category of engineering of
features and that is discrete features
categories. A lot of data sets involve
categories and we want to stratify by
those categories and you want some
efficient way to do that. So we're going
to start doing that uh today. For some
of you this will be repeat. You're like
I know this I know how to do things. Um
there'll be some new stuff trust me
right? uh I hope at least it'll be more
interesting and then what I want to
drive to in the context of the example
the the height weight example that we
started using last lecture is how then
to summarize our estimates in a way that
actually connects to the est demands
that is the questions we started with
says there are many ways I hesitate to
say this but I'm going to say it anyway
there are many ways for a statistical
analysis to go wrong almost countless
ways
Right? Um just like there are many ways
for you to get injured on the way to
work. Uh yet most days on the way to
work you don't get injured. Right? And
the same thing I want to train you so
that most of the time when you analyze
data it does not go wrong. But that
means you have to have some awareness of
all the dangers. You have to look left
and right or at least the appropriate
direction when you cross the street. Uh
and one of the failure cases is at the
end. Sadly, you can do everything right
up until the summary and summarize it
wrong and then the results are are will
be misleading. So, and and a lot of
publish analyses in my opinion go wrong
at this stage. Yeah. So, I want to be
very transparent about um what it would
mean to compute a causal effect at the
end and show you some examples of doing
that. Uh and usually the answer is not a
parameter. I'm sorry, it's not. Um,
okay. That's the goal. I doubt I'll get
through all this today, but I have all
this material, so we will do it. We will
today and uh and next week. Okay. To
remind you where we were last time, uh
we're in the middle of of this beginner
basian linear regression example. Um
regression as Gaus would have liked it.
And we have the howl um Kalahari SAD
data uh represented by that scatter plot
up there. There's more than two
variables but we're focusing on the
causal uh influence of height on weight.
So we have this very simple additive
generative model of that phenomenon just
for adults uh where it's plausibly
linear and uh we have declared our
interest is the influence of height on
weight. Um and we've gotten up to the we
developed a statistical model uh sort of
like Junior's first linear basian linear
regression and now we want to talk about
the prior predictive distribution for
it. Uh after that we're going to
actually get some estimates
um and then and then push out posterior
predictions. And that's the workflow
that we're going to go through. And once
I'm done with this then we'll start
engineering features. We're going to add
another variable from the data set and
start engineering categorical features.
Does this sound fun? Yeah. Okay, that's
good. That was like 20% audience
participation. We'll try to get better
about that as we go. Um,
okay. What is the prior predicted
distribution? I keep saying priors are
just like posteriors. Every posterior is
a prior once you add some more data. So
everything you can do with a posterior
you can do with a prior. They're the
same kind of thing, the same species. So
if you can make predictions from a
posterior, and yes, you can. That's the
goal. you can make predictions from a
prior. Why would you do this? You would
do this to understand the prior and to
understand its properties. Uh and as I'm
going to say over and over again, I have
a slide later that that is a sermon
essentially about this. Um we want
priors that I call weekly informative,
scientifically weekly informative. That
is they embody scientific constraints in
the outcome space that we know because
we're scientists and we understand these
variables. We understand the source of
the measurements, but they do so softly
because we want to allow the model to
discover misspecification. If the data
in the model there's a coding error or
we we've really missed something, we
want to see those assumptions violated
in the estimates. And so that's why I
don't I don't like hard constraints in
the prior. Yeah, that's why we'll have
some examples of this as we go. I know
it's uh may seem a little weird. Um and
then in in a few lectures from now we're
going to talk about the importance of
regularization fighting a phenomenon
called overfitting. Um and weekly uh
informative prior also fight that uh
there are conservative uh uh they induce
conservatism in estimates and that is
usually good. Yeah. Okay. So how do we
generate a prior predictive
distribution? Um there are lots of ways
computationally to do it. Uh this is a
simple example for this model. We can
just use random number functions. So I'm
going to do uh 10 the 3 simulations from
the prior. Um I generate that number of
alphas and that number of betas from the
prior.
Right? Uh and then I just plot the lines
that are implied. So this is 10,000
lines. I'm not going to show all 10,000
of them. I think here I just show 50,
the first 50. Yeah. For this model. Does
this make sense? Um, I know not all of
you use R and that's that's great. I
respect that choice, right? I I use R,
but I feel about R like I do about
English. I only use it because everybody
else does, right? It's actually a
terrible language,
right? There's just absolutely nothing
appealing about English as a language.
Structurally, it'd be easy to improve
it. Same about R, right? But it works.
If we're going to use it, that's it. So
don't, if you're using Python, you're
using Julia, uh, that's great. If you're
using mat lab, I might judge you, but
otherwise it's all great. Okay. Um, so
when we do this, here's the first 50
lines uh of the prior predictive
simulation. Uh, this is not great,
right? I mean, but this shows sort of
like weakly informative means. Um,
they're positive because that's what the
prior insists that B is a proportion.
Remember we had reason previously that
the slope beta needs to be a proportion
uh because kilograms your your weight in
kilograms is a smaller number than your
height in centimeters. So it's so your
weight is some proportion. Yeah. For
most people, right? The the globally
average adult weight is like 60 kilos.
Yeah. Around there with a lot of
variance. Um and and the global uh
average adult height in centimeters is
greater than 60 centimeters.
Yes, that's a child height. Um, so
that's the idea. So we've got it. Uh,
the prior is uniform between zero and
one, which by the way is not my ideal
prior, but it's easy to reason with with
in this first example. Um, this is what
this implies. You have a range of slopes
in these lines. They're all positive.
And the intercept alpha is all over the
place, which is clearly unrealistic,
right? We have some sense where it will
be. we're going to update with the data
and you'll see how this uh closes in um
uh how it gets updated. So I I want to
use a deliberately very vague prior here
as well. But these are this is what I'd
call a weekly informative set of priors.
Um it does create impossible people
though. Yeah. So you could do better but
that's this is great for the
illustrating the example. Okay. Very
quickly here's my preachy slide sermon
on prior. So this is more of a study
slide that you can come back to and
think about in combination with with um
a lot of the stuff that I write in the
book. U there's really are no correct
priors anymore than there are correct
models, right? We're always making
approximations and focusing on
particular features and just
approximating or ignoring others. That's
just how science works. That's fine. Uh
but what you want to be able to do is
scientifically justify uh the priors um
so that they make the estimates more
learnable. Uh whether you're you're
concerned about overfitting then you
choose priors that are focused on
regularization. If you're concerned
about uh positivity that the the
estimate must be positive then you
choose priors that enforce that. You
choose the feature that you really care
about. That's that's what I mean. And I
keep using this phrase weekly
informative. These soft scientific
constraints that reflect what we know
about the measurements and their
relationships before we see the data.
Right? It's not that you look at the
data and and then you decide what the
prior is. You want to be able to justify
the prior in terms of aspects of the
measurements that you know before you
see the realized values. Does that make
sense? And in the areas you work in,
every one of you, you know a lot about
the measurements before you see the
values. Yeah. Because you're a
scientist. You know where the
measurements come from. If now your
colleagues measurements, you don't know,
right? Uh maybe, maybe not, but for your
own, you know, a lot. And you can get
this information in here. Um it's very
much easier to it's always easier to do
better than a flat prior. We're not
interested in the perfect prior because
there's no such thing, but it's better
it's easy to do better, right? So that's
the idea is to always be better. Um uh
we're going to talk about regularization
in a few lectures. And this is a this is
the looming always present risk and
statistical estimations. There's a
tendency to learn too much from the
sample. Remember we we we we want to um
understand in a way that allows us to
generalize to new samples, right? So
then that's a different task than just
fitting the sample. And I'm going to
have a whole lecture about that in in a
couple weeks. Um and I have this this
bottom line is uh reflects kind of the
history of bays in the sciences. Uh
there are a bunch of baby boomers who
were taught to be anti-basian and
there's this one particular line that
they bring up all the time which that is
that priors let you cheat because you
can choose a prior which gives you the
answer you want. Yes you can you could
choose a very very narrow prior exactly
on the slope you want to estimate and
then the data will make no difference.
Now interestingly bas has been used for
200 years and no one does this. So I
don't want to say that this can't be
done. I could do it. Uh but no one does
it. In in contrast, bays in the applied
sciences is used in the other direction.
We use regularizing priors which induce
conservatism in the estimates which
shrink estimates towards null effects as
almost every published basian analysis
does and all the ones I will show you in
this course. Okay. Um so take that
boomers. No, [laughter] it's there are
there are lots of things we worry about
engineering models and basian models in
particular. uh uh and there is cheating
in the sciences. I'll be the first to
say uh but this is not the location
because it if you wanted to cheat, this
would be the easiest way to to show to
be discovered, right? Because the prior
is right there in the model
specification. Yeah. Okay. Um we're
going to take a brief detour in this
example to elaborate my workflow. Again,
I do this without apology, but this is
an essential uh piece of the workflow
that I want to show you in multiple
examples. Um that uh is a bit
superfluous in this example, but in
later examples or in your own research,
it's a workflow that's going to give you
a lot of confidence in what you're doing
and help you understand the estimates
better. And that is synthetic data
simulation and validation. Uh we're
we're going to use the generative model
to make synthetic data. You could call
it fake data if you want, but synthetic
sounds more scientific. Yeah. No,
there's no trickery here. You're not
passing it off as real data. You're
using it in the workflow loop uh to
understand the properties of the
statistical model in relation to the
generative model. Um you could call this
simulationbased validation. It's the
bare minimum thing to do with this is
just show that the statistical model
you've designed in light of the
generative model actually works as
expected assuming the generative model
is true which it isn't
right usually but uh it's it so it
doesn't guaranteed on the real data
you're going to get the answer you want
you get the right answer but it's kind
of a minimum requirement of a
statistical procedure that it works when
its assumptions are valid right if it
doesn't even work when its assumptions
are valid it's probably not going to
work when it assumptions are invalid.
Yeah. Are you with me? So this is a bare
minimum kind of test. This simulation
based validation you can use this
routine also to investigate how uh
statistical models work when there when
their assumptions aren't valid, right?
Because you can have a generative model
that doesn't match the estimator. And
we'll have examples of that in future
lectures. Okay? So hang on. It's
actually fun and easy to do that, right?
Um but for now this is just about the
the basic test of whether it works or
not. Linear regression has been so
studied we know it's going to work in
this case. It's just a machine for
estimating the mean and variance. It's
sort of hard for it to go wrong. But for
the interpretations to go wrong that's
easy. Yeah. But it's going to work u in
this case. Uh it's also a great way to
kind of as I say debug your own
thinking. If you write the generative
model and you push the uh and then you
simulate synthetic observations from it
and push that through your your
estimator, it gives you multiple chances
to re-evaluate your assumptions about
what you're even doing here. And for an
analysis like this, maybe you don't need
that. But in in all of you are working
on the cutting edge of your fields. And
so you you I'm sure like me you when
you're out there you feel like you're on
the edge of the cliff, right? There's a
bunch of stuff that's just new and
undeveloped and it's natural to feel a
certain amount of neurotic anxiety,
[snorts] right? It you wouldn't be human
if you didn't. Uh so I want to give you
workflows that help you manage that
somehow, right? And this is the kind of
thing that that's for. Um there's a very
stronger test that people who develop uh
estimation software use called
simulationbased calibration. And maybe
I'll show you that in a in a later
lecture. Um this is sort of how what
you'd use to show that my package works
as intended. Uh where you don't just do
spot checks. But we'll just do some spot
checks for now. Here's here's the basic
idea. Um we can simulate some uh some
fake people up top. And since this is
such a simple model uh we can do it very
easily. We wrote this function in the
previous lecture sim weight. Uh go back
to the slides from the previous lecture.
It's in there. Uh but we just pass in
some heights and we give it a slope um
and it simulates people's weights. You
remember this? Yeah. Using the the
linear model that we specified, then
we're going to run our statistical
model. Um I'll say some more about this
as we go. Uh this is this quadratic
approximation
um uh function from my package. And we
get some estimates. And the goal here is
to show that the uh model recovers with
some imprecision of course because it's
a statistical estimate the slope that
was used to generate the data. Does that
make sense? Yeah. And you can do this
you can do a few spot checks with a
simple model like this and validate that
it works. But you can also do much more
rigorous studies. Things like power
analysis. You can look at how much data
you need to get it to a certain level of
precision. Um, and there are things
you'll want to learn about data sets
which cannot be learned. And this is a
chance to discover that as well. In this
case, that's not true. But so here's
just an example. You take the code from
the previous slide and it's quite easy
in R to just use the replicate function
to repeat this arbitrarily number of
times and and harvest the estimates from
it and you can plot them up. So each of
these there's a hundred simulations and
model fits. um on the left for a sample
of 10 people and the slope is 0.5 that
is the coefficient on height. So on on
average a person's weight is in
kilograms is half their height in
centimeters
if that makes sense. Yeah. Um and you
can see uh the jiggle around this but
the that the model's working. Um and
then you want to move it right. Uh so
this is like testing for prior
sensitivity too. Yeah. Is is the prior
doing anything here? No. The prior is
incredibly weak in this kind of model.
Um and then 08 it moves there. And then
on the far right I just increase it to
100 to show you that the precision
shrinks. Right? These are these uh I
think these are 89%
credible intervals. Does this make some
sense? Right? So this is the kind of
thing with modern microcomputing. This
is the power at your fingertips. You can
use this to do power analysis, study
design, all kinds of things. And you've
already made a generative model. So the
hard part's done. Yeah. And then these
scripting packages are designed to
replicate this. I I will put the script
for to make this slide up on the
website. Okay. In the scripts folder, so
you can rerun this and play with it as
you like.
Um, okay. Now, we're going to analyze
the data. And I have a pun for the
Germans that I will not explain, but the
hopefully someone gets it. No.
No. Isn't it bad? It's awful. It's so
good. [laughter]
No. Okay. All right. The nonder like
what is this nonsense? But um so we're
going to use the quadratic
approximation.
uh and uh for now because this is fast
and expedient in linear models the
posterior is often um very well
approximated by a multivariant normal.
Uh so you just need the quap um command
and you write the model formula as seen
here. It reflects the the mathematical
definition. And what we get out of this
is a posterior distribution of three
variables. Now
right and so what does that mean? I'm
going to repeat this. This probably be
the last time in the course I repeat
this. What is the posterior
distribution? For every possible
combination of the variables alpha, beta
and sigma, we want a relative ranking of
that pl or the plausibility of that
combination,
right? And there's an infinite number of
combinations. So it seems like a hard
problem, but that's you know that's what
computers are good at. Math is good at
that. Infinity often make things easier
actually. uh but so we have a
multivariate approximation of that uh of
that distribution of plausibilities and
that's the posterior distribution. Uh
the prior is the same kind of thing.
It's just this is updated on the data.
Um thing I want to show you represent uh
you can represent the posterior
different ways. So there's this the most
common thing is this precy function is
my summary function in my package which
gives you this little table in the
bottom left. You often see this. These
are the marginal posteriors for each
parameter. And that's the first thing
you might want to check that gives you
the mean and the standard deviation and
the 89% interval for each. But what this
table doesn't have is the covariance
among the parameters. And there these
things covary. And that's what I'm
showing you on the right. This is called
a pairs plot. Um, and actually that's
the command in R to do it. It's pairs
and you give it the model. And uh, and
you'll notice that alpha and beta are
very strongly associated, negatively
associated. This is extremely common in
regression models uh for intercepts and
slopes to have some co-variance. And so
when you start doing summaries of model
predictions, you need to use all the
parameters otherwise you're ignoring
that covariation. I'll have some
examples of this as we go. Is this
familiar though? Yeah. Um so yeah, I
have a whole slide about this when we uh
call obey the law. Um the first law of
statistical interpretation if I I may
invent laws. uh there is no
international order of statistical law.
So I guess I can make laws and no one
will enforce them, right? But uh if I
could the first one would be the
parameters uh in a in in a posterior
distribution or if you're doing frequent
analysis are still covariance among the
sampling distributions. It's the same
thing applies. They're not independent
of one another. They have joint
information. And so when you make
predictions which are functions of those
parameters, you need to carry that joint
information forward. Um, this can be uh
procedurally difficult, but it's easy
for us because we're just going to draw
samples from the posterior distribution.
And for every set of samples, we're
going to compute predictions. And this
means you don't have to do any calculus,
[snorts] right? It's it's like a
numerical way to do calculus without
even noticing you're doing it. Um, so
I'll give you some examples of how this
works as we go. Uh uh so we're going to
generate what's called the posterior
predictive distribution. We did this for
the globe tossing model before. What you
want to think about here is that the
posterior Yeah. It's got alphas and
betas and sigas in it, but it's really
full of lines, right? And the lines are
what is interesting to us as a
scientist. Yeah. Is the lines. So how do
the lines fit the data? How do we get
lines onto it? You can sample lines from
the posterior distribution. The
posterior distribution is a probability
distribution. we can sample from it. Um,
and in my package there's a function
called extract.samples and you give it
the model fit and it will give you a big
data table of parameter values sampled
from the posterior but every row has the
right correlation structure. It
preserves the co-variance uh between
alpha and beta in this case.
This make some sense
remind you what I said before when I
talked about flow. uh you don't have to
understand everything right now. When
you uh work with the examples and you do
the homework and then you when you
really when you work with your own data,
you will come to understand it. Yeah.
But you just have to keep moving
forward. But we're going to uh this is
an easy way to to push predictions out
of not only this model but any model
whatever the model structure uh you can
extract samples from the posterior. You
can process them using the generative
model to make predictions. So in this
case um uh I've showed you this this uh
table of samples just the first six rows
at the bottom. These are just numbers
and for each of these there's a line
right if we take the A and B value from
each row it implies a line and we can
just plot them and then you can see the
distribution of lines that's the
posterior distribution of regression
lines and I've showed you not all like
not a thousand of them I don't know
maybe like 20 on the plot on the right
and you can see it's a bunch of lines
and they're highly concentrated because
this is the average remember the line
represents the average
but you can see the uncertainty uh in it
Um, of course, because this is a basian
model, we can rewind and we can think
about the whole sample, which is like
350 individuals or so, 350 adults. We
can think of it one data point at a
time. You could get you could get a
posterior distribution for every adult
as you update, right? I'm not going to
do that. That would be painfully slow,
but I am I'm going to do that in
fastforward sort of way. So, we can
remember the prior predictive
distribution on the left, right? Those
are pretty sketchy regression lines.
Yeah. Um uh now we add one individual.
That's what I've done on the right. This
is great. The minimum sample size,
remember, is zero. Uh so one is already
better than the minimum. Uh but a lot of
information happens. We've already
shrunk towards the line. Yeah. But
there's lots of lines that are still
consistent with the data and the prior.
Um we can do this uh for five, for 25,
for 50 and then on the far right the 350
the sample of 352 individuals and you
see how it progressively gets narrower
and narrower. The region of the prior
that is consistent with the data gets
smaller and smaller as we update.
>> Yeah. Question.
>> These are the this is the sample.
>> This is the real data. Yeah. Yeah. This
is the real data and I'm just when you
run quap you give it the whole sample
and so you get the you get the the
figure on the right those are the
posteriors on the right but I could
subsample and that's what I did here you
could just take one individual out or
five out and run the same model on it
and then you'd get the uh graphs on the
left yeah it's the same code though you
just subsample the data and this is fine
remember because uh that's that's what
basine updating is it updates does this
help at all to give you an idea what's
going on and how the how the uncertainty
shrinks as as you uh use more data from
the sample. Okay, the code for this um
you saw before this is the it's the
first code block on this slide. The
posterior is full of lines. Uh the
posterior is also full of people. So
we've got the mean regression
relationship. That's just the middle,
but the people aren't all on the line,
remember? Right? That's what sigma is.
Sigma is the variance around the line.
Uh so we can get that on there, too. Uh
and so the the first remember one of the
reasons we do posterior predictive uh
checking is to see that the model
function properly. Does it even fit the
sample? And if it doesn't then we have
to think really hard about why. Probably
because we missed we have a typo
somewhere, right? Or we have the wrong
data set in memory or something like
that. But um the first way it could fail
is that it can't even capture the mean
relationship. The second way it could
fail is that the variance around the
mean uh is ex is is either overpredicted
or underpredicted. And that might be
something we're concerned about as well,
right? Over or under dispersion, it's
sometimes called. And to see that we
need to use sigma. And so the bottom
code block on this uses sigma to draw
those dashed um uh confidence lines as
well. And to do this,
I'm using a function in my package
called sim, which just simulates people
from uh using the statistical model as a
generative model and the posterior. Uh
but you could do this by hand using the
previous simulation function we wrote,
right? You just need to sample from the
posterior and pass it into it and
simulate individuals. And then all I've
done is calculate uh confidence regions
uh percentile intervals to get those
dash lines. Right? There's a very
detailed uh step-by-step um uh buildup
of this in the book about how to build
up those lines. Okay? I apologize for
not taking more time in lecture to do
it, but this is one of those things
where you can sit down with your cup of
tea in the book and just like go step by
step. And there's a lot more in the book
about it. Does this make sense what
we're doing? And I have a bunch of
examples of this for for all of the uh
examples in the lectures uh in this
course. All right, where have we gotten?
So we had our generative model. We have
our estimate. We did simulation based
validation. Yay. We have prior
predictions. We fed in the data. We got
a posterior distribution which you might
call an estimate, but it's not really
what you want. It's just the where you
have to go. You have to pass through it.
Um and then then we have posterior
predictions at the end. There's other
stuff we could calculate from the
posterior distribution like causal
effects and such and we're going to do
that as we go forward. Uh but this is
like our first moment to pause and say
are you with me? Yeah. Um what we want
to do next with this is add another
variable. Very exciting. Uh categorical
variables are extremely common in data
sets. Um often they're a focus of
interest. their key interest and linear
models incorporate them just fine
because the word linear is actually not
really what's going on here. Linear
models are just additive models. So they
they don't necessarily make lines.
They're just additive combinations of
parameters times data. Uh and so
additive things can produce all kinds of
nonlinear shapes. It's no problem. So
when you hear linear in statistics, I'm
sorry for this. Again, it's the part
it's an example of the rule that
statistitians should not be allowed to
name things, right? But linear models
can make nonlinear shapes. And so, we
can have categories and we can have
curves. Um, I'm not going to do curves
in this lecture. There's really no time,
but there's a bunch of stuff in in uh in
the book about splines and curves and
I'm going to touch on some of that in
future lectures as well. Uh, but but
today we're going to focus on
categories.
And very important thing about
categories is it gives us the way also
to think about formal causal estimates
and how we compute them. And that's what
we're going to drive to at the end of
this case study. Um what are categories?
Uh I think you all know but it's nice to
have a definition. Yeah. Um when I say
categories I mean discrete unordered
types.
The unordered part is important because
there are also discrete ordered types
and we want to model those differently.
Yeah, we will towards the end of this
course model discreet ordered types.
What would that mean? You can think
about it. How about educational level?
Yeah, that's a discrete ordered type.
PhD is closer to masters than it is to
high school,
right? And so those are categories, but
they're ordered and and we want to model
those things. Income levels. Yeah, you
could say, but income's continuous. Yes,
but often all you get is level, right?
And so those are ordered types, but
that's later. So this is discrete
unordered. Yeah, these are things. This
is things like species. I put these sea
shells on here and I can't remember why,
but I really like it. It's a very
attractive graphic, so it stays. All
right. Um, no, I mean, you could order
those. You could invent some way to
order those, but they're discreet types,
and they're all different, right? Uh,
maybe that's the reason I put it there.
I don't know. [snorts] Um, okay. In this
data set, we're going to look at
biological sex, birth sex of the
individuals in the sample. And uh this
is discrete type with uh uh two
categories. And there's also age which
I'm going to ask you to think about in a
homework I think uh but we won't deal
with it um in this lecture. And so this
scatter plot shows all three variables
right where I'm showing uh sex with
color with women in red and men in blue.
Yeah. Uh with height always on the
horizontal. I hope always. There's
probably a slide where I do this wrong
and I forget. I hope all always on the
horizontal and weight always on the
vertical. Um, how do we model this? Uh,
we're going to ask uh causal questions
about the influence of sex on weight.
We're still really focusing on weight as
the outcome variable. And as always in
this course, when you you start into
this before you can design a statistical
model, you need to think scientifically
first about the generative relationships
amongst the variables. And we start with
this with a non-generative causal
representation. these uh causal diagrams
because it's a workflow for scaffolding
you into a generative model. Now the
first thing you need to declare before
you've decided any of the distributional
relationships or functional
relationships the exact mathematical
functions that relate the variables is
just which variables listen to which
others and and that listening that's a
weird word does this help that listening
um has to do with the consequences of
interventions. If you intervene on a
variable, which other variables change
as a consequence? Does that make sense?
This is not the only meaning of causal,
but in applied statistics, it is almost
the only meaning of causal. Yeah. So,
for these three variables, since you're
humans, you are prepared to draw arrows
which represent those listening
relationships. Uh but let me let me a
little bit because this is the first
example. And in the next lecture and
even the one after that, I'm going to
take these basic building blocks about
variables listening and build it up into
a larger formal framework and and teach
you all that DAG stuff that you may have
heard about uh before. Okay, but we're
not going to go into the formal DAG
relationships and definitions in this
lecture. I just want to get your feet
wet. Okay. Um Okay. The first thing to
realize is just looking at the data does
not tell you which way the arrows go.
This is the the fundamental challenge of
of doing science and it's also the
reason you you aren't going to get
replaced anytime soon. Right? So if you
just look at at this scatter plot, it's
consistent with height influencing
weight and weight influencing height.
Yeah. But you are a human being and you
understand human biology and at least
casually uh and so you're prepared to
say that one of these listening
relationships makes a lot more sense
than the other, right? And that is that
height influences weight. We can
intervene on height and it will always
change weight. But intervening on
weight, there are only some really
monstrous interventions on weight that
will influence height. I talked about
this last time. I don't have to
summarize it again, but you're with me
on this, remember? Yeah. Okay. The same
is true for relationship between sex and
height and sex and weight. Uh the data
here now I have histograms. I don't know
if these histogram these are the I I
spent a good hour making a whole lot of
different histograms and I don't like
any of them but this is the best or the
least worst uh that I could find. Are
these readable? You see what's going on
here? Women in red, men in blue. Uh the
height the y-axis in both plots is a
frequency. I think these are bins
rounded to with like bins of with two I
think I chose just for visual uh appeal.
Um
the these histograms are consistent with
either causal relationship. But you
know, yeah, that intervening on height
does not change sex, right?
Now, what does it mean to intervene on
sex? We're talking about birth sex. So,
you'd need some kind of science fiction
genetic engineering, which these days is
possible, right? I bet there's a lab
someplace doing not for humans but for
livestock just dropping in Y chromosomes
or removing them rather because let's
face it males are always a problem in
livestock just as in society. Sorry that
was an internal moment but but uh I bet
this tech exists but you just have to
imagine uh the intervention not that it
be actually possible with contemporary
technology. Uh so we're gonna prefer the
bottom uh uh S2H and S2W in both cases
for scientific reasons. So if we take
all of that together, we get this little
triangle. And what does this mean? Uh
means we're asserting that sex
influences both height and weight.
Yeah, you could think of this as a
question, too. Uh but the reverse arrows
are impossible or ruled out in this
diagram. But it's possible for there to
be no influence once we once we update
with the data. But it all this commits
to is not the magnitude of the of the
influence but just its direction.
Right? Uh height influences weight and
weight is influenced by both height and
sex. And that's all this diagram
assumes. It has no uh uh assumptions
about interactions. In fact, by default,
these sorts of causal diagrams assume
that everything interacts, that there
are no purely additive effects, right?
We'll talk about this more in the next
lecture. Um, so what's exciting about
this, I think, is that now we have a
mediation relationship where part of the
causal effect of sex on weight passes
through another variable. What does that
mean? Well, this is a mechanism of a
sense, right? But it means that uh uh
there are there are possibilities to
break down the total causal effect of s
and we might want to know how to do that
statistically. In fact, people often
want to do this kind of analysis. But
there are statistical risks in doing
that and you have to do it the right
way. Um I I made this little animation
to try to give you an idea what this
means. And I don't know if this is any
value, but I made it so you're going to
watch it. And so here's the idea.
Imagine uh the arrows are like streets
and and uh vehicles. Bicycles. I'm a
cyclist, so they're bicycles. No cars.
Bicycles are leaving the sex station at
a scheduled rate. Some of them are going
to go directly to weight and others are
going to pass through the height
junction. When they pass through the
height junction, they're going to pick
up passengers. And so we're kind of
counting passengers that arrive at
weight. Yeah, this is madness. I know,
dude. Your faces. I wish people at home
could see the faces of the audience. I
mean, yes, a life well spent. Okay, so
here we go. The cycles leave and then we
we pick up some passengers there at
height and go on. By the time we get to
weight, um, some people have arrived at
weight by going through height and
others through sex. And the total number
depends on how both pass. So we might
have questions. So if you're just
interested in the total number arriving
who started at sex, then you don't have
to pay any attention to height at all.
But if you want to decompose the traffic
flows, then you need more statistical
machinery. Does this make sense? And
this is what we're going to try to build
up is some credible way to do this. Um,
and as you add variables in a data set
or an analysis, this kind of thing gets
more elaborate, but there is a logical
way to reason through whether it's
possible to answer the question you want
given these assumptions. And that's
where we're aiming. Okay. So, it's not
just ridiculous. All right. There might
be one more of these uh uh nearly
useless animations in the course, but
again, I made it, so you're going to
watch it. That's all I'm saying. All
right. Um,
if you wanted to do some notation on
this, what this uh little little causal
graph is saying is that h is a is a
function some function. We haven't said
what f subh of sex and weight is a
function of both height and sex. Right?
That's all that we're saying. To make a
generative model, we have to write those
functions.
Are you with me? And that's what you'd
do if you wrote the code. Um just a
couple more things to say in abstract
before we do statistics again. Um again,
the assumption is that there are
unobserved causes generating variation
in each of these variables. We don't
think that they're purely deterministic
functions uh of the of their parents. We
say that is the variables that point
into them. It's called a parent in in
this literature. Um uh and so here I've
drawn these unobserved causes U, V, and
Y. And I've I've chosen those letters
for no good reasons. And I put them in
circles because remember the circle is a
convention for unobserved.
Um, so you don't have to draw these um
necessarily, but you'd want to use them
in your generative model to generate
variation. So if you're using normal
distributions, that just means having a
standard deviation. Yeah. And that's
this is just like the example from last
time, the the generative simulation I
wrote last time, I had a U in there,
which is exactly like this. Yeah.
Question.
>> Conceptually, is that the same as a
latent variable?
>> Yes, these are latent. Absolutely. Um,
but these are uh well, I hesitate a bit.
Sometimes latent is something that can't
be measured. Uh in principle, some of
these could be measured. Uh this is it's
it's not clear exactly. So and the
psychologists in the audience know what
I'm talking about, right? There are a
bunch of psychological constructs which
can never be measured like extraversion,
right? What is that? Like it's just a
statistical thing. There's no part of
the brain where you can measure
extraversion. Maybe you think one day
you will be able to. I'm skeptical,
right? Um so that's latent variable.
Sometimes unmeasured stuff is in
principle measurable. So, but for this
example that's not relevant. But yeah,
there there are things like that. Okay.
Um
uh it's all fine to ignore these things
unless they the same unmeasured thing
influences multiple variables and then
you can get into trouble. And I just
want to I just want to put this in your
mind for now because in next lecture
we're going to come back to this and and
think about it a lot. This is about
confounding, right? Which is the the the
spice of life really. Um but so for
example that would work in this case.
Okay, so humans human biology is
actually really boring. We're really
deeply boring biologically. If you're an
evolution biologist and you study the
rainbow of life, like humans are dull.
Like really dull. We have exactly two
parents that give us genetic information
once in our life. Uh uh we we grow to a
terminal size. Like it's just super
boring all this stuff. We never change
sex during our lifetimes. Well, I mean
that now we can change gender but you
know changing sex fish change sex all
the time. Um and our sex determination
is just sex chromosomes, right? This
so-called heterogic sex determination.
Uh but reptiles aren't like that. And
there are other organisms which have
even more elaborate forms of sex
determination. And so uh uh ambient
variables like temperature can influence
sex as they do in turtles and lizards.
And here's a graph I take from a a paper
that from 2021 which which tries to
estimate these relationships. Um so for
turtles uh many many turtles not all
turtles but sea turtles high
temperatures give you more females right
the temperature the egg is incubated at
gives you more females. And you're
thinking why there are adaptive reasons
for this. Like you know it's I know it
sounds weird but uh and and for lizards
it's the opposite. Okay. So isn't nature
great? So again, what's the lesson here?
Humans are boring. But and that means
there's less confounding. No. Uh if we
were studying lizards, we'd worry about
temperature and we'd probably want to
measure it and and you would only know
to do that in your research design if
you went out and got it because
temperature will also affect weight,
right? Because it'll it'll influence the
amount of food available. Okay, you can
forget about reptiles for the moment.
Let's go back to our example. I'm going
to drop these UV and W things except
they will appear in the synthetic um
data simulation function uh through the
presence of normal distributions
rather than writing them explicitly. So
I've this is like the simulation
function we did last time. Now we're
going to simulate height and weight.
We're going to input um birth sex, a
slope, and an intercept. The first thing
that will happen then is we just count
up how many individuals were passed in.
Um, then we uh simulate height. And
you'll notice I just have means 150 and
160. 150 for X1 and 160 for X2. And then
I add some Gaussian noise with a
standard deviation of five. You could
think of that as the U variable in the
causal graph. Does that make sense? Uh,
and then something similar for weights.
Now we have a line with an intercept
subset. Uh there are two alphas, one for
each sex, and there are two slopes, one
for each sex. Um so each sex has its own
uh the weight of each sex is is a
different proportion of its height on
average. And then we add some noise
again at the end with a standard
deviation of five. Does this make sense?
I'm not saying this is the right
simulation. You could write a different
generative simulation. It doesn't have
to be additive, but this has all the
moving pieces in it. And and I wanted to
show you the relationship between the
structural diagram on the right and what
it means to add generative assumptions.
Yeah. Question.
>> Sorry. What is the weight? Sorry. The um
yeah the unmeasured part of sex.
>> Um there isn't one. Sex is an input
variable in this simulation.
>> In the D we have that.
>> Oh yeah, you're right. I do have
something there. Um, uh, there's stuff
that in humans like, uh, the sex
chromosome, right? So, you could back
up. There's stuff upstream of biological
sex like the presence of a Y chromosome.
>> Again, humans are boring. In reptiles,
it would be temperature. But, uh, sex is
der biological sex is a derived variable
even in humans because there are
chromosomes that influence it. or in as
you're a human biologist too so I know
you know this like actually the Y
chromosome has very few genes on it and
so you could actually just in an embryo
uh give it hormones and it'll develop
into a male right you just need or
actually even upstream of the hormones
there's just regulator molecules that
turn on stuff on the X chromosome that
makes embryos different in invertebrates
differentiate into males right
>> but then mathematically do we have it in
>> no We we don't
>> but the two R norms are U and V.
>> Yes. R U and V. Yes. Does that make
sense? You see what I'm doing? Um in
this simulation, there's no generative
model here of S.
Uh and that's Thank you for asking a
question because this is an important
thing. It's often true when we write
generative models that they're not fully
generative. We treat some variables as
exogenous. I actually did this already
with height and weight. Height wasn't
generated. It was an input variable. I
just made an arbitrary uniform
distribution which is not and a number
of you complained about that because
you're like humans don't have uniformly
distributed heights. That's right. That
wasn't part of the generative model.
Yeah. I was just trying to make nice
graphs that had a representation across
the whole x- axis. Yeah.
Good. Okay.
Um All right. I think we're almost ready
uh to do stuff. All right. So, here's
some synthetic people. Yeah. This is
what when you run this function. Uh um
so I generate I flip a bunch of coins
for sex generating a vectors of a vector
of ones and twos and then I pass that
into the simulation we wrote and we get
a bunch of simulated heights and
weights. Um okay what good is this? Now
we're going to think through asking
different questions about the data set
and that means also about the synthetic
data. And the the virtue of the
synthetic data is we can do experiments
on it and we can verify that the stat
model works. Uh so there's three
questions we're going to think about
with this data in the context of this
case study. And I want to take a little
bit of time probably the rest of this
lecture just working through the
structure of these and introduce some
notation to talk about them so that we
can get our head straight about what it
means to ask for the causal effect of a
variable on another. Okay.
Um
uh the first will be the causal effect
of of height on weight which we've we've
done already. Yeah. But it'll be nice to
review this so that we can build up the
others. And then we're going to ask two
um questions about the causal effect of
sex. The first is the causal effect of
sex on weight. You might call this the
total causal effect because it passes
through height in addition to there
being a direct path. Possibly we need
want to measure uh we're not going to
measure those paths. we're going to
measure the total effect and then the
second is a decomposition where we ask
about the direct causal effect that is
what is the effect of sex on weight um
without going through the h uh and we
need to spend some time thinking about
this I believe because it's weird it's a
weird counterfactual because in a real
person there is no
there's only the total
right so what does it mean
scientifically to ask about the direct
effect I want to spend a little bit of
time talking about that um first uh one
of the ways this is often taught and I'm
not against this but but I I want to try
to do better is um stats instructors
will give you heruristics about things
you should do and shouldn't do and these
heristics are like many heristics
generally valid uh but they're sometimes
wrong they sometimes lead you astray and
in addition to that you want to
understand them so in this context we're
going to do something that you might
call a mediation analysis uh where we're
looking at causal effect as it passes
through different pathways. Um and in
this context what the advice you'll
often get and it's very generally valid
is when you do a statistical analysis
you should stratify by that is condition
on everything that was measured
pre-treatment. Treatment being the
causal effect of interest. So if you're
doing an experiment it's when you
intervene that defines the treatment. If
it's an observational study the
treatment is just the variable you're
making a query about. So stuff that's
causally upstream of the treatment um
fine put it in the model. In fact, it's
good because it gives you more cystical
precision. Anything uh that is post
treatment that is causally downstream of
your treatment, you should not add to
the model. And again, that's generally
good advice. I'm not going to explain
these heristics right now. We're going
to derive why they're generally true as
we go through. And I also want to show
you that sometimes they're not right.
And that's important to understand.
Connected to this is even like really
fundamental questions about statistical
inference like why do experiments work?
Think about it for a second. You can
blurt out an answer if you want but you
don't have to. Just think about it. I
expect many of you have been taught that
what experimental randomization does is
it creates coariant balance between the
treatment arms and that's why it works.
But this is false. That is not why
experiments work. You do not need
coariant balance for experiments to
work. fact so there's an importance to
understanding heristics are not enough
right you all are getting PhDs or you
already have them right so this is fine
if it was just undergrads heruristics
are like safe so they don't do too much
damage in the world but you folks are
the cutting edge so I want to give you
some framework where you can reason
through these things understand the
heristics and when they're when they're
invalid
um so let's come back to our three uh
queries our three estims this is the one
we've done before the causal effect of
height on weight. Uh I'm going to use
this notation that um not everybody uses
but it's extremely widespread where we
say the causal effect of height on
weight is p which is in in statistics a
little p means a distribution of this is
the most overused symbol in statistics.
It's really a shame. There's like one
function in statistics and it's always
p. Again, statisticians should not name
anything. But uh so read this as the
distribution of weight conditional on
doing height. What does that mean?
Intervening on height. Right? This is
different than the distribution of
height conditional uh distribution of
weight conditional on height because
it's an intervention and that's the
definition of a causal effect here.
Yeah.
This is what distinguishes. This is
where the arrow comes in because
remember if you flip this the
distribution of height conditional on
intervening on weight the distribution
be the same for every weight.
Yeah, there'll be no difference. Yeah,
you wouldn't need weight uh to predict
it. Uh but the intervention on height
does affect weight. Uh the other way to
say this is when you compute a causal
effect in a in a statistical summary
like in a paper usually what you're
doing is you're contrasting you're using
that do distribution um to make a
contrast between two different levels of
say height here. You'll you'll compute
the distribution of W um intervening on
height to set it at some particular
value little h on the left here and then
again at some particular value H prime
and then you look at the contrast and
that's a causal effect. Is this familiar
to some of you? Yeah. So this isn't too
weird but that's what a causal effect
means. It's it it notice it also doesn't
mean understanding the mechanism
which is disappointing uh but true.
Um the second one very similar uh has
exactly the same structure. The causal
effect of sex on weight uh the
distribution of weight when we intervene
on sex. There's two paths here but the
logic is the same. Um the one that's
really quite different is the one at the
bottom where we want a direct causal
effect of sex on weight. Now we want the
distribution of W conditional on
intervening on sex fixing height at some
value.
Does that make sense? So it's in a sense
you're holding you're blocking the
causal influence of sex through the
height path by fixing if this were an
experiment you would somehow fix height
which you can't do here. Um you can't do
an experiment on this. Would you fix it?
But if you were doing an experiment on
say you know fungal disease in in um
greenhouse plants you could fix things.
Yeah there would be experimental things.
The good news is using statistical
machinery we can learn we can do
decompositions like this in cases where
we can't do the experiment and that's a
real bonus. Yeah. Because there are lots
of things most of most stuff in human
biology cannot be ethically experimented
on but it can be learned but you need to
be really careful about the assumptions
that license it. Does this make some
sense? Now we're going to do each of
these. Um and I only have four minutes
so I'm not going to do it all today but
this is the the setup for what we'll do
next time. Um,
okay. Uh, so we can diagram these two
things out. We're going to go on from
here. We've already done the causal
effect of height on weight. That was the
first part of this lecture where we we
completed that. Uh, we're going to start
with the left hand side of this. What's
the causal effect of of sex on weight?
The total causal effect. And on the
right,
um, we're going to get the direct
effect.
We'll finish both of these next time,
but let let me try to get started. I'm
going to use the word stratify a lot.
We're because the way we're going to
estimate the causal effect of sex on
weight is is by stratifying by sex uh
putting in a categorical variable.
Stratify just means to produce estimates
for each level of yeah strata right from
the Latin strata. [snorts]
Yeah. Um I'm sorry I don't know what
else to say about that word. It just
means strata, right? Um okay.
Uh so now a little bit of software
engineering and this this will be the la
the last thing I can get through today I
think. Um when we I have this metaphor
of drawing the owl right that I had in
the first lecture. So when we draw
categorical owls there are a number of
ways you can do it and and they all
work. Um but I have a a preference uh
and I have reasons for that preference
that will become clear as we get further
in the material. And that preference is
to use a technique called index
variables. Um a very common way to do it
is instead using an indicator or dummy
variable which is a 01 coding. Um in
machine learning this is like called hot
coding or one hot coding or something
like that. Yeah. Which machine learning
people are always marketing, right? I
mean a dummy variable sounds dumb. One
hot coding that sounds like something
you can sell to a CEO, right? I did one
hot coding. They're like, "Oh,
did you know? [laughter] Tell me more.
dummy variables like no they're out the
door right so um this is why machine
learning took over the world right but
uh uh index variables will do the same
thing um uh so I should say for
indicator variables you take each level
of the category each category and you
make a column for it and then uh it's
that column is full of ones and zeros
and in every row that is in that
category there's a one and in all the
others there's a zero so you get a bunch
of extra variables for every category
There's a new column, a new variable. In
the index variable approach, there's
just one column for all the categories.
And each category gets its own index. 1
2 3 4 5 6 7. Okay? And these are
unordered labels that are going to let
us fetch parameters out of the posterior
distribution. That's all they're for. Um
they they they will achieve the same
estimates and the same understanding.
But the index variable approach has some
advantages which I list here. um you can
use the same model code but add more
categories and the model code won't
change
because there's just an index variable
in it. Whereas with dummy variables you
have to keep adding new dummy variables
to the linear model. And if you had a
100 categories that would be 99 dummy
variables uh and it's just one index
variable. Okay. Okay. So, when we get to
like multi-level models and it's easy to
have hundreds of of categories because
those categories can be administrative
districts, classrooms, people, um the
index variable approach is just simpler
and you it helps you stay sane. Um okay.
Uh all that goes on with index variables
is you imagine there's when we stratify
a parameter by some categorical
variable, we're going to essentially
make more parameters. So here like uh
say we had an intercept alpha and we
wanted to get an intercept for each of
four different categories
um here represented by colors just to
just to help you match up uh the
correspondence. Then what we're saying
is there's a vector of alphas 1 2 3 and
four which correspond to the different
categories uh synced up by the arbitrary
index values that we give them. Yeah.
Question.
>> We don't start at zero.
>> No uh we start at one. Uh, and the
reason is because R is is starts at one,
>> but in the previous one it was zero.
>> Um,
was it
>> in the data in the data set there's a
variable called male which is 01, but
we're going to make that into an index.
It goes one two.
>> Yeah, like in the simulation code. Yeah.
Question.
>> Well, there's a word of warning. So um
Luke told me the other week about a case
where people had coded I think countries
like this
>> but then they had taken care and then
they had actually treated it as a
number.
>> Yeah.
>> And then yes
>> bad things happen because those look
like numbers.
>> Yes. Yes. Exactly. So the the question
was a word of caution. There was a paper
that was retracted some years ago where
they had a country codes and they put it
into the software and the software
interpreted it as a continuous variable
and gave a slope for it. That mistake
happened uh because they were using can
software. Uh if you use so I say the the
torture of using my package is that you
have to do everything by hand. The
virtue of you using my package is that
that mistake is impossible
right because it does no interpretation.
So what happens in normal formula
packages like LM and R is you you give
it a variable and it interprets whether
it's a factor or not based upon its
variable type and if it's coded
numerically like it was in that case
then it'll make it a slope. Uh these
index variables as long as you're using
ulam uh then you're fine but if you're
using ulam then you have a kind of
mental illness that I have transmitted
to you. Yeah. And that's the problem
with that. But yeah that's a good word
of caution. um the the most embarrassing
retraction that is probably not I can't
I shouldn't say that one of the more
embarrassing retractions that has ever
happened. There's another question.
>> Yes.
>> If you introduce it just
>> that would be the intended use and yet
[laughter]
so I will say the constructive thing and
we're at the end of the lecture. The
constructive thing about this point is
um you really need to test right. So I
mean they could have caught that just by
testing
>> or just looking at the fact that they
got one slope.
>> Yeah. Exactly. There's like
>> there's just there was no model
checking, right? There just zero model
checking workflow. No posterior
predictions, nothing going on there in
that workflow. So I don't want to blame
the design of the software there. It's
it's the problem is is as we say a
behind the keyboard problem,
right? Or in front of the keyboard
problem. That's where the that's where
the mistake was. Clearly, uh the machine
is just doing what it was told to do.
Okay. So um final thing and I'll let you
folks go uh once you've got um uh this
alpha thing the model looks basically
the same except now there's this
subscript which is the index variable
with this bracket i on it and i is the
row again. So what this means is um
color I is whatever value of color there
is on row I and so you get a sub one or
a sub 2 or a sub3 or a sub4 depending
upon which index value is on that row.
Does that make sense? But the model
looks very similar. It's just that now
you're getting a a different intercept
depending upon what category that row is
in. Yeah. Does that help? I know this is
super exciting. Uh this is essential
machinery for doing causal inference. It
absolutely is. Okay, I'm going to stop
there. Uh when you come back, we will
pick up from here and talk about this
extremely exciting intercept and I will
help you understand how these indices
work and then we will get back to making
causal uh estimates. Uh thank you for
your attention and I'll see you next
time.